[RUMBLING]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> How is the character of our
life reflected in the movie,
"The Matrix"?
I'm your host, Bruce Lipton, for
this series "Inner Evolution".
[THEME MUSIC]
In previous episodes, we learned
that the mind represented
the interface between
the environment
and the control of our biology.
Described as science fiction,
the movie, "The Matrix",
is more accurately
a documentary,
for we have all been programmed.
The movie's proverbial red
pill offered individuals
an opportunity to escape
their programming.
Many have actually experienced
the equivalent of that pill
when they manifested Heaven on
Earth, The Honeymoon Effect,
after falling in love.
This session focuses
on the mechanism
by which the mind shapes
our outer life experiences,
and how we can
effectively use the mind
to create a happy,
healthy harmonious life.
In previous episodes,
what we discussed
is the fact that
our beliefs control
the character of our lives.
And more importantly,
our beliefs
are primarily programmed
during the first seven
years of our
development, and that
these developmental programs
actually run 95% of our life.
Well, the question is,
how do we control this,
or can we control this to
create the life we want,
not the one we've been
programmed to experience?
Well to understand
this, let's start off
with a very simple
fact, the mind
is interpreting the
environment in which we live,
and the mind creates
behavior to complement
those environmental signals.
It's all based on
interpretation of the world.
To understand the
action of the mind,
there is a mechanism
in medical science
called electroencephalograph.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The electroencephalograph is a
mechanism where you put wires
on a person's
head, and you could
read their brain activity.
The reason is very simple.
The thoughts of an
individual brain
are manifest through
electrical activity.
This electrical activity is then
conducted up through the skin,
and the EEG wires are actually
receiving those signals
and interpreting
our brains function.
The electroencephalograph is
reading an internal expression
of our consciousness.
That this internal
consciousness is then
responsible for releasing
neurochemicals, and hormones,
and emotional chemicals
that ultimately
control our behavior.
So the conventional
belief is our mind
is contained within our head.
Our thoughts are exclusive
to us only and not available
to the outside world.
However, there is
a newer technology
in reading the
function of the mind,
and that newer technology is
called magnetoencephalograph.
Well, it does the
same kind of thing.
It reads the electrical
activity of the brain,
and then reveals the
functioning of the mind.
But here is an
important difference
between magnetoencephalograph
and electroencephalograph.
And the differences
is this, the EEG
has wires directly
touching our skin
and we're reading the
conduction of brain activity
up to the skin.
However, magnetoencephalograph
uses a probe
that is outside of your head.
It doesn't even touch your body.
I said, well, what's
the significance?
I'm reading your brain
activity outside.
So your thoughts are not
contained in your head.
Your thoughts are broadcast
out into the field.
Well, then all of
a sudden it says
that your thoughts are creating
an environment of energy
that you're
broadcasting to interact
with the energy of
the surrounding world.
Well, what influence
will that have?
Well, to get an
idea, let's go back
to an earlier
understanding, and that
is when two energies that
are in harmony come together
and where they interfere
with each other,
they add up the power
of their energy waves
and make a more
powerful vibration.
So this is called constructive
interference or good vibes.
But it can affect
our environment
in many different ways.
So, for example, if I
have a crystal goblet,
and the atoms in this
goblet are spinning
at a certain vibration, and
I have a tuning fork that
has a pitch that is the same
vibration as the vibration
of the atoms in the
goblet, then what
happens when I hit
the tuning fork
in the presence of the goblet?
The vibration of the tuning
fork moves toward the goblet,
the atoms in the
goblet are already
spinning at a certain
vibration, and where
the vibration of the
tuning fork interacts
with the vibration of the
atoms in the goblet, that's
called a constructive
interference,
it causes an amplitude
increase in the vibration,
more powerful vibration.
Well, here's the problem.
A goblet holds its shape
because the atoms are all
interconnected in
such a way that they
maintain the shape of a goblet.
But if I caused the atoms
to spin much, much faster
because of the tuning fork's
constructive interference
with the atom spin,
the atoms will
spin so fast that they actually
cause the goblet to explode.
The atoms blow apart
and the goblet breaks.
Well, this is called
constructive interference.
And constructive
interference really
reveals how harmonic
resonance occurs.
That means when there's
a vibration in harmony
with something
else, then the two
will interact and actually cause
an increase in that vibration.
Well, let's look at
a simple experiment.
In this experiment
I have five goblets
with different
vibrational frequencies
as recognized as f as
frequency, as v, w, x, y, and z,
five different frequencies.
And I have a tuning fork
tuned at frequency x.
Question is, what will
happen to these goblets
when I hit that tuning
fork at frequency x?
All the other goblets that
are not at frequency x
will not be affected
by that vibration.
Only goblet with
frequency x atoms
will respond to
that tuning fork.
And so, this becomes
an important insight,
because it really reveals
that a vibration can pick out
something in the
environment that
is in harmony with
that vibration,
interfere with it in a form
of constructive interference,
and excite that object
in the environment.
Well, all of a sudden,
I go back to the story
of magnetoencephalograph
and what
does this really represent?
Well, it represents
something very important.
Your brain is a tuning fork.
Your thoughts are not
contained in your head.
They're broadcast
out into the field
as vibrational frequencies.
And I said, well,
what's the relevance?
Well, I'd like to show that
using this model, where
I have four goblets.
But these are not
crystal goblets.
These goblets represent
different characteristics
of life.
In goblet number
one, there there's
a woman arguing
with her partner.
In goblet number two, is a
characteristic expression
of a woman thinking,
how did I always end up
with jerks like this?
The third goblet is
a wonderful goblet
showing a romantic dinner.
And the fourth
goblet, is a goblet
that shows a courtroom scene
where he said and she are
being broadcast to the judge.
The thought vibrations
of an individual
will only interact with
situations that are
in harmony with that thought.
So let's say a person
grows up in a family where
there was lots of arguing
between the mother and father.
During the first seven
years of that child's life,
the child is
downloading a program
that parents interact by
arguing with each other,
because the child
just downloading
what they're observing.
So if an individual came
from that foundation, then
guess what, their thoughts
will most likely precipitate
an argument between
themselves and their partner,
because this is the program
being manifest by the mind
and becoming real.
Remember, the
function of the mind
is to create coherence between
the program and the reality.
Now, let's look at
the same situation
and say that this
individual came
from a happy, loving
family with a mother
and father always shared
romance, and love,
and happiness together.
Well, in that particular
case, this individual's mind
will be broadcasting
a frequency that
interacts with the goblets
showing the couple having
a romantic dinner.
And this becomes important
because then it says,
are the things that happened
to me accidents in my life?
Things came to me?
I go, no.
We are actually
broadcasting a vibration
that will manifest a physical
expression of our thoughts
and our life experiences.
It's very interesting,
because most of us
are really not aware of the
thoughts of individuals.
However, many people can
read an individual thoughts,
because the thoughts are
being broadcast to the field.
Very interesting is when people
live together for a long time,
the individuals learn how to
read each other's thoughts
without actually manifesting
a conscious expression
of those thoughts.
So, for example, if you hear a
conversation between two people
who've been together
for a very long time,
it may sound
something like this.
Hey, would you like to--
Yes, I would.
What day?
The sentences aren't
even completed yet.
How can this happen?
Once you start to become
coherent with your partner,
you can also start to
read the vibrations that
are coming forth from
their consciousness,
and, therefore, actually
speaking is not even necessary.
And, in fact, in
primitive cultures,
most people were
communicating nonverbally
through thoughts being
transmitted as vibrations
and received by
another individual.
So this is a really
important understanding
about how the field
is actually creating
what our life is experiencing,
and how individuals
can actually read those
thoughts of other people
and understand something
that people around
have no vision of, because it's
interpreting the vibrations.
In the movie, "The
Matrix", the story
is that everyone's
been programmed,
and that they're living their
lives through these programs.
But the protagonist in the
movie has an opportunity
to take either a blue
pill or a red pill.
If he takes the blue
pill, when he wakes up,
he's back into
the same old world
with the same old expressions
that were always there.
But if he takes the red pill,
he gets out of the program.
And this becomes
profoundly important,
because, as we understand
now, 95% of our life
is coming from the program.
And if we could get
out of the program,
then we could manifest
a different character
in our lives.
So it's like taking a red pill.
And I really want to emphasize
a very important fact.
Most of us as adults out here,
have already taken the red pill
with amazing results.
We didn't know we
took the pill, but we
did experience the results.
When we fell in love,
our life changes.
Consider this, the day before
you fell in love, blah,
blah, blah, your life
was blah, blah, blah,
for weeks and days and years.
And then, all of a sudden,
you meet a special person,
and just 24 hours later, your
whole world is different.
All of a sudden, you're
so deeply in love.
And guess what?
Everything becomes
more beautiful.
Life is so much more precious.
The food's better.
The music's better.
Everything's better.
Even the job that wasn't
so good is better.
I go, what happened
in 24 hours to change
a blah, blah, blah life
into Heaven on Earth?
Every day our life is 95% coming
from the subconscious programs,
because our conscious
mind is thinking.
When people fall in
love, they stop thinking.
They become mindful.
What does that mean?
They stay in the present moment.
I mean, think about it.
You've waited your whole life
for this person to show up.
They show up.
This isn't the time
to be thinking.
This is the time to be present,
to enjoy and experience what's
manifesting in your life.
Relevance is very important,
because the moment
you stop thinking, is the
moment you stop actually playing
the subconscious programs.
No more default to
the subconscious.
You are now with
your conscious mind
controlling your
biological vehicle.
And where are you
going to drive it?
To wishes, and desires,
and aspirations.
And this is how when people fall
in love, the immediate period
after falling in love, is a
Heaven on Earth experience,
a Honeymoon Effect,
because being in love
actually keeps your hands on the
wheel with the conscious mind,
and no defaulting
to the subconscious.
You immediately start
to manifest a life.
So The Honeymoon Effect
is profoundly important,
because what does it represent?
Well, number one, it's a
state of exuberant health.
Yes, when people
fall in love, they
become healthier, more
alert, alive, and joy.
And that's why, because
the concept of love
is translated into the chemistry
of love, as we mentioned,
in the form of dopamine,
and pleasure, and oxytocin,
and bonding, and growth hormone.
In fact, we have an
abundance of life energy.
I bet you when you
first fell in love,
you probably made love
for days without stopping
for food or sleep.
Where do you get
all the energy from?
Because love is an
empowering force
that gives us that energy.
And what is the
consequence of this love?
Well, we began to
experience a life of Heaven
on Earth, because, now,
we are the creators, not
operating from
programs, but operating
from our wishes and our desires.
And this is how we
change our life.
Well, most of you
experience that.
But you've also
experienced this,
the honeymoon
doesn't seem to last.
Many people have just
a very short period.
Some people can
sustain a honeymoon
for weeks or months, even a year
or so, but at some point life
returns back to the life that
it was before you fell in love.
Well, what happened?
What happened to that honeymoon?
And here's the answer.
When you're in love, you keep
the conscious mind present,
and you're creating
your life with it.
However, life gets busy.
And at some point,
you're going to have
to start thinking about what?
Whatever your job is?
Whatever your chores are?
Whatever your
responsibilities are?
Well, the moment you start
thinking, is the moment, now,
your life is controlled by
default, by the subconscious
mind programs.
I say, so why is this cause
a problem in The Honeymoon?
And the answer is
profoundly simple.
During that time
period, neither partner
sees the other person's
subconscious programs,
most of which are negative.
However, once life
starts to get busy,
and one of the people in this
relationship starts thinking,
then, guess what?
Their behavior at this
moment is no longer
controlled by wishes and
desires conscious mind.
It is now being run by
subconscious programs,
and some of those negative
programs out of the 70% that
are negative start to manifest.
Your partner all of a
sudden sees this behavior,
like, where did this come from?
Who are you?
All of a sudden, the
partner is observing
their partner's negative
behavior, never seen
before during The Honeymoon.
And all of a sudden, the
negative behaviors start
to show up and your
partner looks and goes,
wow, that behavior
isn't so great.
But, hey, we have a great
relationship otherwise,
so I'll compromise.
Sometimes my
partner's like that.
OK, I'll just compromise,
because most of the time
we're having a good thing going.
Let's just say, my
partner and I are
having a wonderful honeymoon.
And she comes up and asked
me a simple question,
but at this moment I'm
thinking, thinking about my job
or whatever I have to do, she
asked me a simple question,
and I turned to her and
go, blah, blah, blah!
My partner looks at me and
goes what kind of behavior
is that, and all of
a sudden you have
to recognize the
behavior I just played
was not from my
conscious mind, it
was from my
subconscious program.
My conscious mind was
even paying attention
because it was thinking.
And all of a sudden,
right now, I'm
being accused of having some
bad program by my partner.
And I'm going, I don't know
what you're talking about,
because, basically,
I didn't even
see the behavior that she saw.
And now, there's an
argument, because I'm
going to deny I'm that person
that just did that behavior.
She's going to recognize
I just did that behavior.
Ooh, an argument
starts, and that
is the beginning of a
breakdown of the relationship.
And it's really due to
the fact that my behavior
from my subconscious
was invisible to me.
I didn't see it.
She saw it.
So the significance about
this is, when we're in love,
and we stay in the
conscious mind,
it's the equivalent of
taking the red pill.
Because when you
take the red pill,
you're out of the program.
Now, the issue is this, OK,
I've got some bad programs.
I didn't see them, but
my partner sure did.
Now, if we end up
in arguments, that
will actually stress the
bonds of our relationship
and could cause it to break.
But consider this
other possibility.
If both partners are aware that
subconscious programs manifest
themselves, but they don't
represent who we are,
they just represent the download
that we got, instead of, oh,
that was lousy what you did.
Goes like, did you hear
what you just said,
or did you understand
what you just said?
This gives us an
opportunity to have
a dialogue and a discussion.
And then, what we can do
is find out, oh my God, I
have this bad program that
I acquired from my father
during the first seven years.
Now, I understand I
have this bad program.
Now, the question is this,
how can I change the program?
Well this is where the biggest
problems in relationships
come from.
How can you get out of the
limitations of programs
that where you downloaded
from other people that
are disempowering?
And the answer is, there
are four fundamental ways
that you can change
subconscious programming.
Three of these ways,
you can control.
One of them, actually,
you have no control over.
For example, you have a
major life experience.
You go to the doctor,
and the doctor
tells you, oh my God,
you have terminal cancer.
You're going to die.
Well, this is a
shock to the system.
Now, there's two
ways you can respond.
You can go, oh, yes, doctor.
OK, I will prepare to
handle all my details,
because I'm going to die.
Or, and this is the cool part,
a person would say, oh my God,
my life has been so rough,
and so much stress on it,
if I only have a
short time left,
I'm going to leave all
these stresses behind.
And what do they do?
They go out and they start
enjoying their lives.
They leave behind
all the stresses
that were causing the
disempowerment that they
were experiencing.
And guess what, they go beyond
the time they were supposed
to die, because when they
changed their consciousness,
they empowered themselves with
a new understanding of life,
one in harmony, one in love,
one in pleasure and enjoyment.
Let me tell you a
very important fact.
There is an entity in
the conscious mind.
That's you.
But the subconscious mind is
a record playback mechanism,
something like a CD player.
Well, let's say you
have a CD playing it,
and you don't like the program.
And you go up to
the player go, I
don't want to play this anymore.
I want you to do a
different program on there.
Don't play this anymore.
How much talking
to the CD player
will it take before
that program changes?
The answer is, you could talk
until you're blue in the face.
Why?
There's nobody in
there to hear that.
It's just going
to play a program.
That's what it's all about.
And that's why it becomes
so disempowering for us,
because we make a big effort to
try to change our subconscious
programs by talking
to ourselves,
and it doesn't work because
nobody in the subconscious
is there.
So nobody's listening.
So how are you going to
change the subconscious?
There are three
fundamental ways you
can control the subconscious.
Number one, is hypnosis.
Yes, remember the
first seven years
of your developmental
programming
where you downloaded
those negative programs,
you were in a state
of mind called theta.
And theta is hypnosis.
So whatever you heard from your
parents, family, and community
about you and your
life, you downloaded
whatever they just said.
It was recorded.
So if you want to change a
program, you can use hypnosis.
I go, does that mean you
have to see a hypnotherapist?
I go, no, actually
you don't have to.
All you need to do
is the following.
Is identify the programs that
are limiting and disempowering
to you.
I said, OK, listen, I got these
programs before age seven,
and many of them in utero,
and age 0, age one, age two,
I have no consciousness of what
the heck those programs are.
So let me help you
first with this.
Your life is a printout of
your subconscious programs.
Whatever you like that
comes into your life,
comes in because you have a
program to acknowledge that.
Whatever you desire or
wish for, and you want,
and you have to
work hard for it,
you have to struggle over it,
you have to sweat over it,
you have to put a lot of effort
in to making this thing happen,
whatever program you got doesn't
support that destination.
So, now, I said,
well, what can I do?
I say, well, there are these
self-help programs where
self-hypnosis programs.
I say, what are they?
You put on a pair of earphones
at night when you go to bed.
As alpha goes slower vibration,
it enters into theta.
And at that moment,
consciousness is disconnected.
You've just fallen asleep.
But guess what?
The brain is now
operating in theta.
Well, that was
the original state
that you downloaded
programs in the first place.
So if you put earphones
on, and are listening
to a program of empowerment,
after you fall asleep,
you don't hear the program.
Your subconscious
hears the program.
And by repeating these
programs every night
for a number of
nights, guess what?
One day you'll wake up
and your subconscious mind
would have downloaded these
programs through the process
of habituation.
That is one of the ways the
subconscious mind learns.
So, OK, self-hypnosis.
Second way, how did you
learn after age seven,
because before age
seven you were in theta
and were downloading
through hypnosis.
But after age seven, now
you're in consciousness.
I said, well, how to learn
programs after age seven?
And the answer is,
habituation, repetition.
You repeated something.
You practice it.
You want to play an instrument?
Well, it's in your hands.
You can't play it
until you do what?
Practice, practice,
practice, practice.
What is that?
Habituation.
You are learning by repeating.
There's a point
where, guess what?
You don't have to
practice anymore.
You can pick up the
instruments and play it.
Driving, same thing.
In the very beginning,
your attention
was all the details of
driving, all in the details,
the mirrors, the windows,
the gauges on the dashboard,
what's going on in the
world outside of the car.
You had to pay
attention to all these.
But, guess what?
Practice, practice, practice.
And now you can drive a car
without paying any attention
to it.
You can put the key in
the car, start driving,
and start thinking about
where you're going to go,
what you're going to do, and not
even pay attention to the road.
Why?
Because subconscious has
downloaded how to drive a car.
It is now a habit.
So you want to change a
program, start a new habit.
Fake it till you make it.
Example, you're
not a happy person,
so I say, what do
you want to do?
I want to be happy.
So guess what?
All day long, in spite
of whatever unhappiness
or experience, you say
to yourself, I am happy,
I am happy, I am happy.
I mean it doesn't conform to
the world you're experiencing,
but here's the important part.
Repeating it, and repeating it.
Why?
That is how the
subconscious mind learns
after age seven, repetition.
Create a new behavior and
repeat it and repeat it.
It will automatically become
a subconscious program.
And the last method of changing
program is something brand new.
There is an old
saying, necessity
is the mother of invention.
Well, as we're facing the
sixth mass extinction of life
due to human
behavior, guess what?
It's a necessity to
change our behavior.
And out of that necessity
has arisen a new modality
of rewriting programs.
This is referred to
as energy psychology.
These are a number of
modalities, that many of them
engage what is called
super learning.
Well, I'll give you
an example of it.
Have you ever seen
anybody read a book
by moving their
finger down the page?
As fast as they move their
finger down the page,
they read every
word on the page.
They can stand in a
bookstore and turn the pages,
and do this, and read an
entire book in five minutes.
That's an example
of super learning.
Once you identify what
program you want to change,
you create a positive present
tense solution for that problem
you have.
If you're not healthy,
you say, I am healthy.
And make that a program.
What's the function of the mind?
To create coherence between
the program and reality.
And if you really want some
insight into this, my website
simple, brucelipton.com,
under Resources,
there are 25 or 30 different
energy psychology modalities
so you can look up and find
one that feels good to you
and try it out, because
this is the opportunity
to take power back
over your life,
because your consciousness
is controlling it,
and if you can program your
subconscious with your wishes
and desires, there's an
immediate and wonderful
consequence.
So in conclusion, now that we
have an understanding of how
to reprogram our
subconscious mind,
we now have the opportunity
to create the life we desire.
By understanding how our
consciousness creates
a honeymoon, we are
offered an opportunity
to manifest Heaven
on Earth experience
for every day of our
long, long lives.
While the conscious mind can
create a happy, healthy life,
we must also recognize
that it can manifest
any disease and even death.
In the planet's current
health care crisis, up to 90%
of all diseases are
attributed to stress, and not
the action of change.
Our next session will describe
the mutually exclusive
relationship between growth and
protection behaviors, the role
of the HPA axis, which
represents the Hypothalamic
Pituitary Adrenal Axis,
and undermining our health,
and the power of the
placebo on nocebo effects
in shaping our
health and happiness.
Thank you for joining me.
I'm your host, Bruce
Lipton, for this series
on "Inner Revolution"
through biological change.
Join me for the
next episode where
we'll talk about an
insight into manifestation.
[THEME MUSIC]